# What to install for compiling P4 programs and running them on bmv2

Recommendations for a machine (or virtual machine) that you use solely
for the purpose of building P4 open source tools:

+ RAM - At least 2 GB (1 GB is definitely too small)
+ disk - 11 GB is barely enough for Ubuntu 16.04 Desktop Linux OS plus
  build of p4lang/behavioral-model and p4lang/p4c, leaving
  intermediate build files on disk for quicker rebuilding.  Add more
  as you wish for other tools and/or data files.  Before running the
  install-p4dev.sh script linked below, you must have at least 4 GB of
  disk space free on the Ubuntu machine's disk.
+ number of CPU cores / virtual CPUs - 1 is enough, but the p4c build
  can take advantage of 4 CPU cores in parallel, so 2 or 4 will speed
  up some things.

Clone the p4lang git repositories named below and follow their README
build/install instructions, or use the shell script
[bin/install-p4dev.sh](bin/install-p4dev.sh) to do it for you on an
Ubuntu 16.04 Linux machine.

From following install instructions for `p4lang/behavioral-model`
repository (including the `sudo make install` step), all of these
should exist in /usr/local/bin:

    bm_CLI
    bm_nanomsg_events
    bm_p4dbg
    simple_switch
    simple_switch_CLI

From following install instructions for `p4lang/p4c` repository, these
should exist in `$P4C/build`, where `P4C` is a shell variable
containing the path to your copy of the `p4lang/p4c` repository.

    p4c-bm2-ss

[Historical note: There is also a `p4lang/p4c-bm` repository whose
install instructions will result in the following file in
/usr/local/bin:

    p4c-bmv2

However, note that p4c-bmv2 only compiles P4_14 programs, whereas
p4c-bm2-ss above can compile both P4_14 and P4_16 programs.  p4c-bmv2
may be somewhat more feature complete than p4c-bm2-ss as of July 2017,
still, but p4c-bm2-ss is getting there.]


# Recommended path changes for your shell

It can be convenient to have all of these commands in your shell's
command path, e.g. for bash:

    P4C=/path/to/your/copy/of/p4c
    BMV2=/path/to/your/copy/of/behavioral-model
    export PATH=$P4C/build:$BMV2/tools:/usr/local/bin:$PATH


# Other useful commands

Useful for quickly creating multiple terminal windows and tabs:

    create-terminal-windows.sh

To create veth interfaces:

    sudo $BMV2/tools/veth_setup.sh
    # Verify that it created many veth<number> interfaces
    ifconfig | grep ^veth

To watch packets cross veth2 and veth6 as they occur, tcpdump and
tshark are 2 similar programs.  You only need one of them.  Use
tcpdump if you aren't sure which one to use.  tcpdump is simpler and
does not parse as many different kinds of packet headers.  tshark is a
text version of Wireshark, and can parse more packet header types than
I have ever heard of.

    # tcpdump options used:
    # -e Print the link-level header (i.e. Ethernet) on each dump line.
    # -n Don't convert addresses to names
    # --number Print an optional packet number at the beginning of the line.
    # -v slightly more verbose output, e.g. TTL values

    # Note: Some versions of tcpdump do not accept the --number
    # option.  If so, just remove that one.
    sudo tcpdump -e -n --number -v -i veth2
    sudo tcpdump -e -n --number -v -i veth6

    # Add -xx option to get raw hex dump of packet data:
    sudo tcpdump -xx -e -n --number -v -i veth2
    sudo tcpdump -xx -e -n --number -v -i veth6

    # If you want to use tshark for even more details about decoded
    # packets, but the output for each packet can often spread over 30
    # to 40 lines:
    sudo tshark -V -i veth2
    sudo tshark -V -i veth6

    # Add -x option to get raw hex dump of packet data:
    sudo tshark -x -V -i veth2
    sudo tshark -x -V -i veth6


# Automated running of compiler and bmv2 with checking of results

This is _not_ needed for straightforward running of P4 programs.  This
semi-advanced info, only useful if you want some gory details on how
to run some of the bmv2-based automated tests that come with the open
source p4c compiler.

If you have followed the instructions above to install both the `p4c`
and `behavioral-model` repositories, you should have these two files
of Python code as part of the p4lang/p4c repository:

    $P4C/backends/bmv2/run-bmv2-test.py
    $P4C/backends/bmv2/bmv2stf.py

The first file `import`s the code of the second and uses it.

After you have built your own copy of the p4c compiler, you should
have a directory `$P4C/build` on disk.  If you run these commands:

    cd $P4C/build
    make check

then as part of running the hundreds of test cases included with p4c,
it runs the `run-bmv2-test.py` program many times.  To run only one of
those test cases, but with extra log message printing enabled, try
these commands:

    cd $P4C/build
    ../backends/bmv2/run-bmv2-test.py .. -b -v ../testdata/p4_16_samples/issue447-5-bmv2.p4

The `-v` is optional, and enables the extra log message printing.
Similarly `-b` is optional, and causes a temporary directory that is
created by `run-bmv2-test.py` to be left on disk after it completes,
instead of being deleted.

There are many sample P4_16 programs in the
`$P4C/testdata/p4_16_samples/` directory, and a command like the one
above should work for all of them.  Some of the `<basename>.p4` files
have a corresponding `<basename>.stf` file in the same directory.  The
`.stf` files are a simple text file format parsed by
`run-bmv2-test.py` with packets to be sent in, packets to expect out
(which `run-bmv2-test.py` checks the actual output packets against the
expected ones, and reports any differences), and P4 table entries to
be added.

`run-bmv2-test.py` uses `p4c-bm2-ss` to compile P4_16 source files to
a bmv2 JSON configuration file, then runs `simple_switch` with the
`--use-files 0` command line option (among other options).
`--use-files 0` causes `simple_switch` to read packets from `.pcap`
files instead of sniffing them on virtual Ethernet interfaces, and to
write output packets to `.pcap` files.  This has 2 benefits:

+ There are separate pcap files for input vs. output packets, so it is
  easy for the test environment to distinguish input vs. output
  packets.  It is not obvious to me if it is possible to do this for
  packets sniffed on veth interfaces.

+ By default, Linux sends occasional IPv6 Neighbor Discovery packets
  to veth interfaces, which can throw off your `simple_switch` test
  results.  While there is some way to disable this behavior, Linux
  will not send such packets to pcap files.

To successfully take advantage of the `--use-files 0` option, you
still must specify interfaces on the `simple_switch` command line
using one or more `-i` options.  For example, if you use the option
`-i 0@pcap0`, then the P4 program port 0 will get input packets from
file `pcap0_in.pcap`, and write output packets to file
`pcap0_out.pcap`.

The packet out pcap files created by `simple_switch` are not Ethernet
type pcap files, the way that a pcap file captured from an Ethernet
interface using tcpdump or Wireshark is.  They are type 0, which is
shown as 'No link-layer encapsulation' from the output of the Linux
`file` command, and causes a warning like the one below when using
Scapy's `rdpcap` function to read the file:

    >>> pkts2=rdpcap('pcap0_out.pcap')
    WARNING: PcapReader: unknown LL type [0]/[0x0]. Using Raw packets

If you want to change such a file (named `pcap0_out.pcap` in the
sample command below) to one with a link type of Ethernet, which makes
it more useful when reading into Wireshark, use a command like this:

    editcap -F pcap -T ether pcap0_out.pcap pcap0_out_ether.pcap

From the output of the commands below, it appears that this also
changes the capture length from 0 to 262144.  A capture length of 0
seems to cause trouble for some programs that read pcap files, too.

    % file pcap0_out.pcap
    pcap0_out.pcap: tcpdump capture file (little-endian) - version 2.4 (No link-layer encapsulation, capture length 0)
    
    % file pcap0_out_ether.pcap
    pcap0_out_ether.pcap: tcpdump capture file (little-endian) - version 2.4 (Ethernet, capture length 262144)

The sample `scapy` interactive session below shows that the original
`pcap0_out.pcap` file contents are read in using Scapy's `rdpcap`
function as `Raw` packets, whereas the Scapy packet objects created
from reading file `pcap0_out_ether.pcap` are decoded as Ethernet
frames.  They also demonstrate that the packet contents after
converting them to strings with `str()` are the same byte sequences as
each other.

    [02:22:05] $ scapy
    INFO: Can't import matplotlib. Won't be able to plot.
    INFO: Can't import PyX. Won't be able to use psdump() or pdfdump().
    WARNING: No route found for IPv6 destination :: (no default route?)
    INFO: Can't import python Crypto lib. Won't be able to decrypt WEP.
    INFO: Can't import python Crypto lib. Disabled certificate manipulation tools
    INFO: Can't import python ecdsa lib. Disabled certificate manipulation tools
    Welcome to Scapy (2.3.3)
    >>> p1=rdpcap('pcap0_out.pcap')
    WARNING: PcapReader: unknown LL type [0]/[0x0]. Using Raw packets
    >>> type(p1[0])
    <class 'scapy.packet.Raw'>
    >>> p2=rdpcap('pcap0_out_ether.pcap')
    >>> type(p2[0])
    <class 'scapy.layers.l2.Ether'>
    >>> p1[0]
    <Raw  load="RT\x00\x125\x02\x08\x00'\x01\x8b\xbc\x08\x00E\x00\x00(\x00\x01\x00\x00?\x06e\xbb\n\x00\x02\x0f\n\x01\x00\x05\x16\xa2\x00P\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00P\x02 \x00b\xe1\x00\x00" |>
    >>> p2[0]
    <Ether  dst=52:54:00:12:35:02 src=08:00:27:01:8b:bc type=0x800 |<IP  version=4L ihl=5L tos=0x0 len=40 id=1 flags= frag=0L ttl=63 proto=tcp chksum=0x65bb src=10.0.2.15 dst=10.1.0.5 options=[] |<TCP  sport=5794 dport=http seq=0 ack=0 dataofs=5L reserved=0L flags=S window=8192 chksum=0x62e1 urgptr=0 |>>>
    >>> p1[0]==p2[0]
    False
    >>> str(p1[0])==str(p2[0])
    True
    >>> p1[1]==p2[1]
    False
    >>> str(p1[1])==str(p2[1])
    True

There are many `.stf` files in the `$P4C/testdata/p4_16_samples/`
directory, but there are also many more `.p4` files that do not have a
corresponding `.stf` file in that directory.  For all of those, I
believe that the behavior of `run-bmv2-test.py` is to use the file
`empty.stf` in that directory instead.  In this case, I believe no
`simple_switch` process is started by `run-bmv2-test.py` - it just
compiles the source files and checks whether the compiler crashed,
gave errors or warnings, etc. (I believe - I haven't gone through that
carefully yet).

After running `run-bmv2-test.py` with the options above, you should be
able to find a directory with a name like `tmpXXXXXX` where XXXXXX is
replaced with random-looking letters and digits, and that directory
should contain files created near the time you ran the command.  I saw
files with names like this:

+ issue447-5-bmv2.p4-stderr - From the name, probably the stderr
  output from running `simple_switch`.

+ pcap0_in.pcap - I know that `run-bmv2-test.py` creates the input
  pcap files read by `simple_switch` as named pipes with a `mkfifo`
  Python method, and I believe this file is a named pipe.  It has size
  0, even though packets were sent to `simple_switch`, I believe
  because it is a named pipe rather than a regular file.

+ pcap0_out.pcap - A sequence of packets sent out on port 0 by
  `simple_switch` process.  In general there can be more than one of
  these files, with the '0' replaced by the port number for each
  simulated Ethernet port.

+ switch.log.txt - The log file produced when you give the `--log-file
  switch.log --flush-log` options to the `simple_switch` command.  This
  is the same kinds of details you see on the console when you use the
  `--log-console` command line option to simple_switch, except written
  to a file instead.  It contains details about all packets received,
  processed, and sent, including every P4 table searched, the search
  key, whether the search result was a hit or miss, and if the search
  found a matching table entry, the action and action parameters for
  that matching entry, etc.
